So let's now add this condition here
to this upload test report step.
For that, we can add our if field here
and then here we write the condition
that must be met to execute this step.
And the condition we write here can be wrapped
in this GitHub Actions expressions syntax here
with the dollar sign and the double curly braces
since we will evaluate an expression here
since we will look at some dynamic values here
but the if field is actually special
since you typically use expressions here
because typically, you don't just wanna hard code true
or false here because in that case,
you could just omit the if clause all together
because that would always be true or false.
Since you typically need a dynamically derived value here,
GitHub Actions allows you to omit this syntax here.
It allows you to omit the dollar sign and curly braces
even though you can still add them if you want to
but you can omit them
and you can also just write your expression just like this.
That's an exception for that if field
because you typically need dynamically derived values here.
Now, here we wanna make sure that this runs
if this step failed.
That's essentially what we wanna do.
If this step succeeds,
this will run anyways and actually, we don't want it
to run in that case
but therefore, if we would add a condition
that makes sure that this step only runs
of that step failed, we would make sure that it does not run
if that steps succeeds,
so if our tests succeed
but on the other hand, it does still run
if our tests fail, which currently is not the case
as you just saw.
Now, therefore, we need a way of referencing this step.
We must find out whether that step failed or succeeded,
and to do that we can add the id field to that step.
Now, we did see the id field in action a little bit earlier
in the course already.
You can add the id field to any step you have
and that allows you to assign a unique id to every step
which then can be used to reference that step
and use data from that step in other steps
or in your job.
For example, we used it earlier in the course
to get hold of some outputs that were set in a step.
Here I'll give this step an id of run-tests
but the id name is totally up to you.
It doesn't have to be run-tests.
And here in the if condition,
we can then reach out to the special steps context object,
which is one of the context objects supported by GitHub.
Here it's this one.
That's the steps context object,
which we're using now.
And on this steps object,
we can reach out to other steps by their IDs,
so now here I add run-tests
to reach out to this specific step.
And then we learn in the official documentation
that on this steps context object,
when we do reach out to a specific step by its id,
we actually can get information
about the outputs produced by that step,
which is what we did earlier in the course already
but we can also get the conclusion
or the outcome of that step.
And in the end, these two fields simply tell us
whether the step succeeded or failed.
Now, we've got two fields here, conclusion and outcome,
instead of just one field
because we also have this continue-on-error field,
which we'll explore later,
which actually allows us to continue after a step
even if it failed
and in that case, we've got one field
that tells us whether the step would have failed
without continue-on-error
but then actually was treated as a success
because of that field added
but since we don't know that field right now,
we can ignore it and we can simply use the outcome here.
So here we can use steps.run-tests.outcome
to find out whether that step succeeded or failed.
And in the end, both outcome and conclusion
then contains some text
that tells us whether the step succeeded
and we get, for example, success as a text if it succeeded,
failure if it well, failed,
canceled if it was manually canceled
or skipped if it was skipped
maybe due to some other if condition
that was attached to that step.
So in our case here,
we're looking for the failure text
because we know that if this step failed,
this run-tests step failed,
then we wanna upload our test reports.
So here we check if the outcome is equal to failure.
And failure is wrapped between single quotes
because that is some text.
It's not some context object
or anything like that but it's some text,
it's a string to stay in the programming world
and therefore, it's wrapped with single quotes.
And the double equals sign operator here
is used for comparing this value
for equality to this value.
So whether outcome is equal to failure.
A single equal sign is not enough.
You need two equal signs here.
By the way, there are various operators you can use
in your if conditions.
For example, that double equal sign operator
to check for equality
but you can also check for inequality
by adding an exclamation mark.
You can combine multiple conditions
with logical ands, or ors.
And you can also look for greater or smaller
or greater or equal or smaller or equal values.
So you can basically do what you know
from if conditions in programming languages.
You have a very similar syntax here with GitHub Actions.
Now, with this condition added to this step,
what we should see is that this step here runs
if this step fails
but does not run if this step succeeds.
So if we now create a new commit here,
if we stage our files and create a commit
and push this, we'll see whether that works.
And we see that as this executes,
our test step fails as expected
but we still skip this upload test report step.
So it's still not working as we want it to work.
I can tell you that indeed,
this step, the upload test report step
would be skipped if test code succeeds
but we haven't met our goal of running upload test report
if test code fails.
And that, of course, is an important goal to achieve.
Now, this step here should execute
when this step fails
but that's not happening here
and the question is why is this not happening?
Well, the reason is that yes,
our condition here does indeed check
whether that step failed
but GitHub Actions still ignores this step
because it still has its default behavior
of not executing any other steps
after this failing step.
To change that default behavior,
we must add a special condition here.
We must execute a special function here
in this if condition of this step.
And that's the failure function written like this,
which we combine with that other check
with this and operator.
Now, what's this failure function here though?